gifts so thank you for that and um
maybe in in the spirit of trying to have
some also time to
think further together um we move to
nica and david
if you guys are you know
ah well
see
in the spirit of reception let me think
about that notion um
it reminds me a little of spinoza where
you know power is both the power to act
but also to be acted on or to you know
to affect and to be effective at the
same time
um
which is
interesting because um i had been
thinking about the notions of care and
freedom and somewhat similar terms
uh
so i was going to start but by right
in that spirit actually reacting to
something that um zombie nancy said
earlier which was about sensibility as
he said
there's a sort of a difference between
you and him about about is it possible
to actually change sensibilities that we
can't change
ultimately they're all part of a package
of a sort of a deeply embedded common
sense which you could make the argument
that what artists and revolutionaries
have in common is is that they
actually are people who do that you know
a revolution is marked you know a
revolution really happened when there
was a transformation of common sense
in the most deeply uh embodied ways
and um
like you know what i have been thinking
about is how do we turn this moment into
such a transformation there will be a
transformation of common sense
um
so how do we insert ourselves as
revolutionaries in a process where
transformation of
sensibility sensitivities common sense
are all
changing immediate in in dramatic ways
yeah
and the best we can do is perhaps to
intervene in the ways that we can talk
and think about it um
i've been really thinking very hard
about everything from how we measure
economic um
indicators you know uh to
[Music]
the very notion of disciplines like
economics and their body of assumptions
about human nature that are kind of
packaged into them which have become so
much part of common sense
um how can they directly be challenged
um
so
my one tentative answer to productivism
that i've been trying to develop
is
the notion of production and consumption
are as
as we've been pointing out essentially
theological notions and it's not just
monotheism i mean there's a lot of
traditions of monotheism
monotheism isn't that big a deal i think
that you know uh people who identify as
the western tradition are a little bit
self-important about this you know the
idea that there is one single
supernatural force is not like some
incredible breakthrough it would never
have occurred to anybody else
um for good or for ill um what's what
seems to be
unique about the particular tradition
we're talking about is precisely the
idea of a deity that created the
universe out of nothing
so that idea of creation and production
seems to you know most gods work with
existing materials um their creation is
actually reprocessing and and and um
you know a moment of
coalescence and transformation rather
than something comes out of nowhere um
and that notion you know the word
production means to push out you know
you have to say this black box of
factory and it's always analogous to a
womb you know god punishes us by
imitating creation evil suffer in labor
um
sort of producing babies men will
produce stuff um so so that was
theological notion of productivism
production that economy is production
consumption if we were to get rid of
that what would we substitute how would
we rethink it
and um so i thought maybe
everybody's been talking about care a
lot recently and and and feminist
economists constantly point out that all
labor could be conceived as caring labor
uh please you know make even cars
because you care people can get around
um so so if we start with the value of
labor as being in you know economies how
we take care of each other
um
care is the basis of the valuable labor
but
we can immediately run at the problem of
care as a form of oppression which is
something that we're grappling we're all
grappling with
to what degree
is a prison giving care
um
it feeds and closes you um is care all
that great uh is it actually a value in
itself so so i actually thought maybe
the best way out of that is precisely by
saying well kara's action which
maintains and enhances another person's
freedom
or another entities freedom uh including
environments animals plants or
autonomy
for some degree um you know is you think
of the paradigm of care as a mother and
a child right my mother takes care of a
child so they can grow and thrive but
also they can play which is the ultimate
expression of freedom itself for as its
own say for its own sake um okay so so
in that idea of reformulating
essential structures of value
um how do we imagine what
um
what art does and um this is something
that nick and i have been like sort of
um
and um
in looking at alternate traditions of
how you could um
well or you imagine the value of art uh
in any we take it from marx's
perspective and then i'll enter this um
there's the idea that their production
of value and the realization of value
takes place in different spheres
um
and exploitation is possible because of
that rupture so you produce value in the
workplace and it's realized in the
market
um
but even if they're producing value at
home we're bringing up children it gets
realized in the public sphere in a way
that allows the primary producers to get
ripped so that's a productivist view of
this but um you know that sphere of
realization is is requires social
relations at an audience um in fact for
any given actor society are those people
who you want in whose eyes you realize
value
um
you know for
everybody has people who they care
whether they know they've achieved
something whether they got something
whether they have something whether they
did something uh and other people that
it never occurs them to even wonder what
those people think about them so that is
society for them the audience for the
realization of forms of value so so
perhaps the work of revolutionary uh you
know revolutionary workplace art is is
to think of art not as a production of
an object which is realized in a field
of value but to unify
the creation of that field and the
creation of
of whatever it is you're thinking of as
the art itself
and that would um
maybe i should turn it over to nick uh
well nick has been thinking very hard
about how these issues were dealt with
in the very early years of the russian
revolution
yeah and also
to be more practical now and to think
what good happens after the lockdown
will end
um
and especially in uh
we can take art as an example because um
artists is um
this
fictional character that represents uh
this kind of creative work um
so i was looking at the
now it's a lot of conversation how to
help parties like germany gave money to
the artists uh
uh guns under cabriza discussing that uh
like the the government's uh the states
um
introduce uh the same new deal and uh in
this case it's a lot of i read some text
about american new deals in 1935
when they employed a lot of people and
tens of thousands of doctors started to
produce public artworks throughout us
and in the same time
in soviet union
it was a lot of public art going on as
well uh in futures under stalin regime
with uh
like being a propaganda art
but just before that it was this
movement called prolly cool at some of
my russian friends who is also here
knows about i don't know how many people
knows about that else so it was uh one
of the founders was alexander baghdanov
and the interesting things about that
movement is his um uh he created uh
um
basically an infrastructure in which uh
people were able to produce art by
themselves in uh
1920s the amount of art that was
produced by this new soviet citizens was
amazing a huge amount hundreds of
thousands yeah it was much more much
more members of the political than were
the communist party at this time uh and
it's very much look the same as what we
see now in lockdown when the people
organize themselves in this huge
communities from facebook and sharing
art and everybody's like singing
collectively on the balconies from the
zoom conference so it was really like um
they created a prodigal created this
infrastructure for
uh playing freedom and so i i grew up in
soviet union when we say that this
infrastructure was so strong that even
after like stalin regime and then uh yet
and now putin regime it's still there so
everywhere er in searching you have this
uh
palestinians of pioneers where you can
study chess for no money or play music
or things like that so the whole uh
tissue societal tissue was transformed
by this
um
i think 10 years probably could exist
not not
so long time and then there are the
other things um that um
mazan was talking about collective
humanity so alexander bogdanov uh um
was
he created the blood institute for the
blood transfusion because he believed
that the same way as
art
supposed to be this infrastructure
infrastructure for collective creativity
the same things we can um
maybe live forever or at least
go under the process of
constant unique
genification
rejuvenation
by just
transporting blood from transfusion
blood
giving a transfusion of blood from uh
the younger people to the older people
and uh he was doing that practically he
actually died because he uh he went
through this blood transfusion from the
person who who had malaria like younger
person and who survived uh because uh
engaged with him in this process um so
and that's uh
it's actually like almost uh as he was
imagining created a physical
infrastructure in which people will be
connected to each other uh a member of
society will um kind of maintain this
collective uh life and health and
youthness um and so on so yeah i i think
that's uh that's a very
cool point to to consider
yeah no i don't really have anything to
add to that a bit i mean i thought one
of the things i found so fascinating
when i was learning about all this stuff
is the degree we always see
soviet culture as kind of a failure and
in a way it was they lost as an eco and
points out culturally because you know
everybody wanted rock and roll and jeans
uh but
the infrastructure they did manage to
create in those few years where they
actually
political was like the artistic version
of the soviets it was you know a
democratized bottom-up collective
creation and really an attempt to really
realize the idea of what would it mean
for everybody to be an artist and some
of the institutions they created were so
dogged that they're still there um you
know despite the government having no
support for this and it's one of the
things that matters to sustain people
through the collapse of society uh you
know through the collapse of the system
of economic disaster was there were
these infrastructures which were created
around
play and creative expression but we're
there and we're reliable and still are
there despite the government's attempt
to like essentially root it out yeah and
so if we talk uh now everybody's talking
about the green new deal but it's really
important to to get into details and to
figure out what kind of green new deal
we will advocate because the green new
deal in the u.s and 30s was a
state-run new deal that
wasn't creating an infrastructure for
the artists for example it was
just
the government helped artists uh do
during this transition when they were
supposed to become a successful uh
entrepreneurs
uh and in soviet union what they did
they create an infrastructure in which
uh everybody could become an artist is
that's how uh the communism was
understood like everything
would mean yeah yeah
once it was finally realized yeah
okay yeah
needless to say lennon didn't like this
very much and have it suppressed just
like yeah the the soviets but
it's a fascinating counter example of
what could have been
yeah
magdaleno was the second popular person
after in bolshevik parties and he was
fighting he was kicked out of the party
and of the problem
quite recently
quite quickly yeah
so
there it is